Methods: classification and evaluation (#4)
greenelab/mpmp-manuscript: content/03.methods.md

This resulted in 3 distinct sets of samples: 9,074 samples shared between {expression, mutation} data, 7,981 samples shared between {expression, mutation, 27K methylation, 450K methylation}, and 5,282 samples shared between {expression, mutation, 27K methylation, 450K methylation, RPPA, mutational signatures}.
When we dropped samples between experiments as progressively more data types were added, we observed that the dropped samples had approximately the same cancer type proportions as the dataset as a whole.
In other words, samples that were profiled for one data type but not another did not tend to come exclusively from one or a few cancer types.
Exceptions included acute myeloid leukemia (LAML) which had no samples profiled in the RPPA data, and ovarian cancer (OV) which had only 8 samples with 450K methylation data.
More detailed information on cancer type proportions profiled for each data type is provided in (the supplement).

### Training classifiers to detect cancer mutations

We trained logistic regression classifiers to predict whether or not a given sample has a mutational event in a given target gene, using data from various -omics datasets as explanatory variables.

> As target genes, we considered 124 genes from the cancer-related gene dataset described in Vogelstein et al. 2013 [@doi:10.1126/science.1235122].

Reviewer: I guess you probably considered 3 sets: vogelstein genes, most mutated genes, randomly selected genes.

Author: Right, good catch - added more detail in 31d05c3

For each target gene, in order to ensure that the training dataset was reasonably balanced (i.e. that there would be enough mutated samples to train a classifier), we included only cancer types with at least 15 mutated samples and at least 5% mutated samples.
After filtering for sufficient mutated samples, 17 of the genes from the Vogelstein et al. gene set had no valid cancer types, leaving 107 genes with one or more valid cancer types to use in further analyses.

Since our -omics datasets tend to have many dimensions and comparatively few samples, we applied an elastic net penalty to prevent overfitting [@doi:10.1111/j.1467-9868.2005.00503.x], as implemented in `scikit-learn`'s `SGDClassifier`.

> This approach is described more specifically in the methods section of Way et al. 2018 [@doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2018.03.046]; our classifiers follow the same general structure.

Reviewer: Asking a reviewer to read a different paper's methods section is a good way to annoy a reviewer. You should reference that paper but also summarize it in brief here.

Author: Good to know - still learning to find the happy medium between too much methods section detail and not enough detail. I moved the citation and added a summary in f52a021; let me know if that's closer to what you had in mind.

In cases where mutation labels are highly imbalanced (very few mutated samples and many non-mutated samples), a classifier with shuffled labels may perform well simply by chance, e.g. by predicting the negative/non-mutated class for most samples.

Recall that for each target gene and each -omics dataset, we ran 2 replicates of 4-fold cross-validation, for a total of 8 performance results.
To make a statistical comparison between two models using these performance distributions, we used paired-sample _t_-tests, where performance measurements derived from the same cross-validation fold are considered paired measurements.
We used this approach to compare a model trained on true labels with a model trained on shuffled labels (addressing the question, "for the given gene using the given data type, can we predict mutation status better than random"), and to compare a model trained on data type A with a model trained on data type B (addressing the question, "for the given gene, can we make more effective mutation status predictions using data type A or data type B").
We corrected for multiple tests using a Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate correction.

> For all of our experiments, we set a conservative corrected _p_-value threshold of $\alpha = 0.001$; we were able to estimate the number of false positives by looking at genes with better performance for shuffled mutation labels than true labels.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For all of our experiments, we set a conservative corrected _p_-value threshold of $\alpha = 0.001$; we were able to estimate the number of false positives by examining genes with better performance for shuffled mutation labels than true labels.
```

We chose our threshold to ensure that none of these genes were considered significant, since we would never expect permuting labels to improve performance.

> However, our results are not sensitive to choice of this threshold.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, our results were not sensitive to the choice of this threshold.
```

For each target gene, in order to ensure that the training dataset was reasonably balanced (i.e. that there would be enough mutated samples to train a classifier), we included only cancer types with at least 15 mutated samples and at least 5% mutated samples.
After filtering for sufficient mutated samples, 17 of the genes from the Vogelstein et al. gene set had no valid cancer types remaining, leaving 107 genes with one or more valid cancer types to use in further analyses.
To match the size of this gene set, we took the 107 most frequently mutated genes in TCGA as quantified by MC3, all of which had at least one valid cancer type.
For our random gene set, we first filtered to the set of all genes with 2 or more valid cancer types by the above criteria, then sampled 107 of these genes uniformly at random.
Based on the results of the gene expression experiments, we used the Vogelstein et al. cancer gene set for all subsequent experiments comparing -omics data types.

> Since our -omics datasets tend to have many dimensions and comparatively few samples, we applied an elastic net penalty to prevent overfitting [@doi:10.1111/j.1467-9868.2005.00503.x].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since our -omics datasets tend to have many dimensions and comparatively few samples, we applied an elastic net penalty to prevent overfitting [@doi:10.1111/j.1467-9868.2005.00503.x] in line with the approach used in [@doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2018.03.046].
```
